# Header
- title: [Qualia](qualia.md)
- book: [Encyclopedia](encyclopedia.md)

# Entry

The concept of *quality* plays a foundational role in understanding perspective and qualification. We will define what it means to *qualify* within the context of a [perspective](perspective.md), and we will use this definition to lend meaning to concept of the *qualifier* of a perspective. But there's no way to formalize the morphological derivatives of "quality" without having a perspective on the notion of qualia. I would like to politely dispense with the idea that "qualia" and the "quale" they pluralize are semantically meaningful. I am not the first to take issue with the idea [^Dennett1988]. But I will try to find a simpler way to get there. 

The notion of a *quality* appears in the literature as a sort of perceptual equivalent to of a physical property. When see a red rose, we experience photons with certain wavelengths on electromagnetic spectrum that reflect off of it as red. The wavelength of the photons that reflect off the petals of a rose are one of its physical properties. Red is one of its qualities. The simplest argument against the existence of qualia comes from a simple fact: a quality and a property both share the property of being a type of property. And there is no linguistic analog of qualia for properties. In object-oriented programming, the properties of a type are inherited. We can discuss them as subjects, but we cannot instantiate them as objects.

The pitch for qualia goes something like this. Suppose there *was* such a thing as the instantaneous experience of a red. Let us refer to that as a "quale" of red. We can then refer to the collection of these instantaneous experiences for a given quality as its "qualia." But is this semantically justifiable? Observe what examples language has to offer. To "see red" is an idiom of English that artfully employs synesthesia to convey the idea that one's anger is so *real* that it has come to take on the quality of a perceptual object: its color. Even in metaphorical form, red still has the status of a quality. If "seeing red" was a useful phrase, it wouldn't be an idiom! We see objects. Objects have qualities. Red is one of them.

We can refer to red as a subject, and talk about how different shades of red relate to one another. But idea that there is the crimson that I experienced at time `t` and the exact same shade of crimson that I experienced time `t+1` as being perceptually distinct. They just aren't. A quality is a perceptual property, and it is a useful distinction to help disabuse ourselves of the idea that we are experiencing a *thing in itself* [^Bader2022]. But to take that idea seriously is to embrace the idea that all we've ever done is experience qualities.

Perhaps it's enough to simply appreciate the ineffability of color itself without an appeal to qualia. Red and blue sit at opposite ends of the electromagnetic spectrum, so magenta a complex color that is not reducible to wavelength. There are imaginary colors, the most outrageous example of which is a recent invention. Olo is a shade of super-saturated seafoam turquoise that is the result of a mapping procedure in which one type of cone in a patch of retina are selectively laser-stimulated without stimulating the others, creating a new color that has absolutely no relationship to nature [^Gibney2025]. 

Olo is ineffable. It needs no qualia. It was never real to begin with. Color is a three-dimensional projection of a one-dimensional physical phenomenon, because our retinas sample the electromagnetic spectrum near three wavelengths. And then somewhere downstream of that, we parse colors into distinct perceptual categories that cannot themselves be inferred from the *properties* of our retina. Red is a thoroughly subjective quality. Let's not lend it objectivity by distancing ourselves from it through the lens of qualia.   